{\rtf1\ansi\deff0\deftab720{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil MS Sans Serif;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2 System;}{\f3\fnil Times New Roman;}{\f4\fnil Courier New;}}
{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;}
\deflang1033\pard\plain\f3\fs36\b Hydrogen\plain\f3\fs20 
\par 
\par Hydrogen is often advocated as an energy medium. Here are some relevant facts.
\par 
\par    1.Hydrogen is the lightest of the elements with an atomic weight of 1.0. Liquid hydrogen has a density of 0.07. These facts
\par      give hydrogen both advantages and disadvantages. The advantage is that it stores approximately 2.6 times the energy
\par      per unit mass as gasoline, and the disadvantage is that it needs about 4 times the volume for a given amount of energy. A
\par      15 gallon automobile gasoline tank contains 90 pounds of gasoline. The corresponding hydrogen tank would be 60
\par      gallons, but the hydrogen would weigh only 34 pounds.
\par 
\par    2.When hydrogen is burned in air the main product is water. Some nitrogen compounds may also be produced and may
\par      have to be controlled. Should greenhouse warming turn out to be an important problem, the key advantage of hydrogen
\par      is that carbon dioxide (CO2) is not produced when hydrogen is burned.
\par 
\par    3.Hydrogen is not available in significant quantities in nature in pure form. The main present way of getting hydrogen is
\par      steam methane reforming, and this will probably remain the most economical way as long as methane (natural gas) is
\par      available cheaply and in large quantities. When the price of methane goes up to more than three times its present price
\par      because of scarcity, hydrogen will be obtained by splitting water H2O into hydrogen H2 and oxygen O2. The chemical
\par      reaction is written
\par 
\par      2H2O + energy => 2H2 + O2.
\par 
\par      The main way of splitting water is by electrolysis. If fossil fuels, e.g. coal, oil or natural gas, are used to generate the
\par      electricity, there is no advantage over using the fossil fuels directly. Indeed you still get all the CO2, and there is a
\par      considerable loss of energy. Therefore, the large scale use of hydrogen depends on using either nuclear or solar
\par      electricity. In both the nuclear and solar cases, there are possible technologies that don't use electricity as an
\par      intermediate form of energy. There is some hope that these processes may be somewhat more efficient than electrolysis.
\par      (There are also proposals to combine heat and electrolysis with some saving of energy.)
\par 
\par    4.In either case, the law of conservation of energy tells us that all the energy to be obtained by burning the hydrogen must
\par      be supplied by the primary source, e.g. nuclear or solar. Of course, since these processes aren't 100 percent efficient,
\par      there is some loss of energy. Therefore, the use of hydrogen as an intermediate is justified only when there is some
\par      reason not to use the primary source directly.
\par 
\par    5.If there is large scale use of solar energy, the energy is likely to be generated far from where it is used and at a different
\par      time. Hydrogen has been proposed as both a storage and transmission medium. It should work for these purposes. I
\par      don't know how hydrogen pipelines compare with high voltage electric transmission.
\par 
\par      Hydrogen can be transported by pipelines similar to those used to transport natural gas. There are some addtional
\par      problems, because hydrogen tends to leak more and can embrittle some metals used for pipelines. The existence of a
\par      208 km hydrogen pipeline in Germany provides evidence that these difficulties can be overcome. (I read about this
\par      pipeline, but no-one confirmed that it exists. Maybe what I read was mistaken.)
\par 
\par      However, the technology of efficient long distance transport of electric energy may be improved enough to obviate the
\par      advantages of hydrogen except for vehicles.
\par 
\par Hydrogen as a motor fuel
\par 
\par Hydrogen can be used as a motor fuel, whereas neither nuclear nor solar energy can be used directly.
\par 
\par Nuclear power requires heavy shielding to keep the neutrons away from people - too heavy for cars. It can be used in ships,
\par and is used in American, British and Russian warships, especially submarines and aircraft carriers. The U.S. and Japan built
\par commercial nuclear powered ships, one each (Savannah and Mutsu). (There were even proposals to use it in locomotives.)
\par However, initial difficulties combined with anti-nuclear politics caused these projects to be abandoned and the ships
\par mothballed. The Soviets built nuclear powered icebreakers, and these are in use. I think nuclear power will be revived for
\par commercial ships when its political problems are overcome and the technology is further debugged.
\par 
\par Solar energy can't be used directly in cars except as a stunt. The current solar-powered cars are just religious exercises in the
\par solar religion. The problem is that a solar array of a size that can be mounted on a car produces too little energy to give useful
\par performance, and even that little isn't available at night or when it is very cloudy.
\par 
\par Hydrogen can be used as a fuel directly in an internal combustion engine not much different from the engines used with
\par gasoline. The problem is that while hydrogen supplies three times the energy per pound of gasoline it has only one tenth the
\par density when the hydrogen is in a liquid form and very much less when it is stored as a compressed gas. This means that
\par hydrogen fuel tanks must be large.
\par 
\par Demonstrations of hydrogen powered vehicles have usually used compressed hydrogen gas. However, because of the low
\par density, compressed hydrogen will not give a car as useful a range as gasoline. It may be even worse than using lead-acid
\par batteries. Hydrogen can achieve a reasonable density adsorbed in metal hydrides, but then the weight of the metals makes the
\par system very heavy.
\par 
\par The most practical way I know of using hydrogen as a motor fuel is to accept the difficulties of handling liquid hydrogen and
\par solve them. There are two. 
\par 
\par    1.The low density. A hydrogen fuel tank will have three times the size of a gasoline tank. Also it must be insulated, and this
\par      will add to its bulk. This seems entirely bearable.
\par 
\par    2.Safety problems. Liquid hydrogen is cold enough to freeze air, and accidents have occured from pressure build-up
\par      following plugged valves. Some say these problems can't be overcome, but I side with those who think they can be
\par      overcome. In a collision the hydrogen tank may rupture, as can a gasoline tank. Limited accident experience suggests
\par      that the danger is somewhat less with hydrogen.
\par 
\par    3.Since the insulation can't be perfect, the hydrogen will gradually evaporate, typically 1.7 percent per day. This is too fast
\par      for a car to sit for months between uses. A tank of compressed hydrogen holding enough to get to a hydrogen station
\par      would solve this. If the engine is flexible enough to burn gasoline as well as hydrogen, a half gallon gasoline tank would
\par      suffice. Some automobile companies, e.g. BMW, have experimented with vehicles powered by liquid hydrogen.
\par      However, hydrogen cannot come into common use until the political obstacles to nuclear expansion are overcome or the
\par      technological obstacles to large scale solar energy are overcome. It is unlikely to be used as long as gasoline remains so
\par      cheap, i.e. as long as oil remains cheap and fear of global warming does not prevent its use. We hydrogen enthusiasts
\par      will just have to wait.
\par 
\par      Here's what Pimentel (1996, p. 211-212) has to say.
\par 
\par           In terms of energy contained, 9.5 kg of hydrogen is equivalent to 25kg of gasoline ( Peschka 1987).
\par           Storing 25 kg of gasoline requires a tank with a mass of 17 kg, whereas the storage of 9.5 kg of hydrogen
\par           requires 55kg, (Peschka 1987). Part of the reason for this difference is that the volume of hydrogen fuel is
\par           about 4 times greater for the same energy content of gasoline. Although the hydrogen storage vessel is
\par           large, hydrogen burns 1.33 times more efficiently than gasoline in automobiles ( Bockris and Wass
\par           1988). In tests a BMW 745i liquid-hydrogen test vehicle with a 75 kg tank and the energy equivalent of
\par           40 liters of gasoline had a cruising range in traffic of 400 km, or a fuel efficiency of 10 km per liter (
\par           Winter 1986).
\par 
\par           At present, commercial hydrogen is more expensive than gasoline. Assuming $0.05 per kwh of electricity
\par           from a nuclear power plant during low demand, hydrogen would cost $0.09 per kwh ( Bockris and
\par           Wass 1988). This is the equivalent of $0.67 per liter of gasoline. Gasoline sells at the pump in the United
\par           States for about $0.30 per liter. However, estimates of the real cost of burning a liter of gasoline range
\par           from $1.06 to $1.32 when production, pollution, and other external costs are included (Worldwatch
\par           Institute 1989). Therefore, based on these calculations hydrogen fuel may eventually become
\par           competitive. 
\par 
\par      The references above are copied from Pimentel (1996, p. 211). I plan to look them up, and this may change what I
\par      say.
\par 
\par      The above comparison between current costs of gasoline and hydrogen power for cars seems to be somewhat biased in
\par      favor of hydrogen. Taxes seem to be included in gasoline cost and not in hydrogen estimates, but roads will still have to
\par      be maintained when hydrogen is used as a fuel. Also I would conjecture that the Worldwatch estimate of the "real cost"
\par      of burning a liter of gasoline is exaggerated.
\par 
\par      For me the decisive point is that the costs of a automobile transportation system using hydrogen produced from water
\par      using nuclear energy are low enough so that people worldwide who use automobiles will not give up the freedom they
\par      provide, regardless of efforts to get people to settle for public transportation or low range cars of one kind or another.
\par      This doesn't say that adequate batteries won't be developed to make electric cars better than liquid-hydrogen internal
\par      combustion powered cars. Maybe they will, but we won't settle for less mobility than hydrogen can provide.
\par 
\par      Mazda has developed a hydrogen powered Wankel car. They are trying to get California to declare it zero emission
\par      with some prospect of success. However, if California chickens out of the zero emission demand (as it should and
\par      probably will), I'll bet the Mazda will not be offered any time soon.
\par 
\par Many people, including car companies, are being persuaded that cars of greatly lower performance, e.g. in size, in range and in
\par acceleration, are acceptable and will be required in the future. For example, Daimler Benz (Mercedes) is now (1996)
\par experimenting with a compressed hydrogen car. However, if just one manufacturer in the world, e.g. with a liquid hydrogen
\par powered car, succeeds in maintaining present performance, then all the fine words about living with lower performance cars
\par will amount to nothing.
\par 
\par West Virginia University has a Hydrogen Review page. It mentions several ways of using hydrogen for motor vehicles. It
\par would seem to me from their numbers that liquid hydrogen is the winner - as stated above. However, the page makes no
\par comparisons at all.
\par 
\par The Department of Energy supports research on hydrogen. The value of this page seems to be somewhat limited. First, it
\par only mentions what is currently being supported by DoE, and doesn't mention what other organizations are doing. Second, it is
\par entirely politically correct as is apparent in the first paragraph. Nuclear energy isn't even mentioned as a possible source, not
\par even to be dismissed. Nevertheless, there is useful information.
\par }
 