{\rtf1\ansi\deff0\deftab720{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil MS Sans Serif;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2 System;}{\f3\fnil Times New Roman;}{\f4\fnil Courier New;}}
{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;}
\deflang1033\pard\plain\f3\fs20 
\par 
\par                          Cars & Fuels: Alternative Fuels Now Available
\par 
\par Carbon-Based Fuels: Reformulated or "clean" gasolines are special blends of gasoline designed to reduce emissions. 
\par 
\par      Where used: In California, beginning in 1989. By 1995, these must be sold in eight Northeastern and mid-Atlantic
\par      states and the District of Columbia. 
\par      Advantages: Any car can use them, and they can be distributed by existing gas stations. Their use helps reduce
\par      emissions of carbon monoxide and ozone-forming compounds. 
\par      Disadvantages: These are not a long-term solution and their use does nothing to curb dependence on imported oil.
\par      They contain the same amount of carbon as regular gasoline. 
\par 
\par Methanol or "Wood Alcohol": A liquid fuel made from natural gas, wood, or coal. 
\par 
\par      Where used: Race cars have used it since 1965 in the Indy 500. Demonstration vehicles have been developed by
\par      major auto companies. 
\par      Advantages: A liquid fuel, comparable in price to gasoline, it can be used in modified gas engines. 
\par      Disadvantages: Gallon for gallon, it has only half the energy of gasoline and it is only slightly "cleaner" than regular
\par      gasoline. Cars fueled with pure methanol are hard to start in cold weather. Distribution problems arise because it is toxic
\par      and highly corrosive. Environmental benefits depend on how it is made: production from coal is a "dirty" process. And it
\par      releases more greenhouse gases than regular gasoline. 
\par 
\par Ethanol or "Grain Alcohol": A liquid fuel made from organic matter or biomass such as sugar cane or corn. 
\par 
\par      Where used: In the United States, it is mixed with gasoline--one part ethanol to nine parts gasoline--to make
\par      "gasohol." Production is subsidized by federal and state governments. In Brazil, pure ethanol fuel is used. 
\par      Advantages: Ethanol can be made from solid waste or leftover organic material. It reduces carbon monoxide
\par      emissions. 
\par      Disadvantages: Ethanol costs twice as much as gasoline but has only two thirds the energy content. It's not feasible to
\par      raise the amount of corn required to produce it. Using ethanol would not significantly curb the release of greenhouse
\par      gases. It may increase smog in the summer. 
\par 
\par Compressed Natural Gas (CNG): 
\par 
\par      Where used: This fuel is in limited use in the United States. More than half a million CNG vehicles are on the road,
\par      mostly in Italy, New Zealand, Canada, and the former Soviet Union. 
\par      Advantages: CNG costs half as much as premium gas. CNG is a comparatively clean fuel--containing much less
\par      carbon monoxide and fewer hydrocarbons. Almost no toxic and carcinogenic pollutants are emitted. Greenhouse gas
\par      emissions would be slightly lower with this fuel than with gasoline. 
\par      Disadvantages: CNG vehicles are more expensive to build and have a shorter range between fuel stops than
\par      gas-powered ones. Because the fuel needs bulky storage tanks, it may be better suited to buses and trucks. It is difficult
\par      to distribute and requires expensive high-pressure gas compressors for refueling. Most natural gas used in the United
\par      States is imported from Canada. 
\par 
\par                                        Cars of the Future
\par 
\par Electric Vehicles: Vehicle whose wheels are powered by electric motors. Electricity comes from an on-board electric
\par source, such as batteries, hydrogen-powered fuel cells, flywheels, ultracapacitors--or some combination of these. Some
\par electric cars have solar cells mounted on them to provide a small part of their energy. The batteries are recharged periodically
\par at home or at recharging stations using power produced by electric power plants. 
\par 
\par      Where used: Some are used in other countries. Prototypes are being tested by the major U.S. auto manufacturers
\par      around the world. 
\par      Advantages: Zero tail-pipe emissions! Electric vehicles would significantly improve urban air quality. They are closer to
\par      commercial readiness than hydrogen-fueled vehicles. They could be powered from domestic energy sources rather than
\par      imported oil, and there are enough power plants available to fuel large numbers of electric cars. How much they
\par      contribute to air pollution and global warming depends on the type of fuel used at the power plants that generate the
\par      electricity. 
\par      Disadvantages: Currently, electric vehicles cost more than gasoline vehicles to buy and operate. An electric vehicle
\par      could increase a family's electricity consumption by 22 to 55 percent. Most EVs use lead-acid batteries, which are
\par      heavy, have relatively short lifetimes, and require maintenance. It is still difficult to store enough energy in these batteries
\par      for long trips, so electric vehicles have a limited range--100 miles (161 kilometers) or less--before their batteries must
\par      be recharged. EVs require a system of recharging facilities, battery-recycling centers, and other equipment. 
\par 
\par Solar Vehicles: Solar vehicles are experimental electric vehicles that derive some of their power from the sun. 
\par 
\par      Where used: Primarily in special races of similar vehicles. 
\par      Advantages: The same as with electric cars. An additional advantage is that they do not require electricity from a
\par      power plant. 
\par      Disadvantages: They are currently expensive to build. It is difficult to find the space on a car for enough solar cells to
\par      provide adequate power, hence they have a limited range. 
\par 
\par Hybrid Vehicles: Vehicles containing two propulsion systems: for example, one battery-powered electric motor and one
\par internal-combustion engine using gasoline or a similar fuel. 
\par 
\par      Where used: None widely available. Different kinds of hybrids are under development worldwide. General Motors
\par      and Ford Motor Company are developing hybrids over the next five years with support from the U.S. Department of
\par      Energy. 
\par      Advantages: The vehicles get better fuel economy and lower emissions than gasoline-powered vehicles. They also
\par      have a greater range than electric vehicles. They could serve as transitional vehicles until more powerful batteries are
\par      developed. 
\par      Disadvantages: Because of their dual systems, they are more expensive and complicated to build than either a
\par      battery-powered or an internal combustion car. 
\par 
\par Hydrogen-Powered Vehicles: These vehicles are powered by hydrogen--a gas made from natural gas or coal, or better yet
\par from water using the simple process of electrolysis. The cheapest current source of hydrogen is natural gas. 
\par 
\par      Where used: Only in test vehicles so far. Prototypes are under development in Europe, Japan, and the United States. 
\par      Advantages: Hydrogen is an abundant element. Hydrogen fuels could reduce or eliminate the need for imported oil.
\par      Hydrogen-fueled vehicles would have no emissions of greenhouse gases and only small amounts of nitrogen oxides. In
\par      the long term, fuel cells, rather than internal combustion engines, would power the vehicles. 
\par      Disadvantages: Hydrogen is difficult to distribute, store, and handle. A major hurdle is figuring out how to store
\par      enough compressed hydrogen gas in a car to give it an acceptable range. If hydrogen becomes the fuel of the future, a
\par      distribution system like the current network of gasoline stations might have to be built. 
\par }
 