{\rtf1\ansi\deff0\deftab720{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil MS Sans Serif;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2 System;}{\f3\fnil Times New Roman;}{\f4\fnil Courier New;}}
{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;}
\deflang1033\pard\plain\f3\fs32\b Gelled Liquid Hydrogen: 
\par                         \plain\f3\fs20 A White Paper
\par 
\par                                          Bryan Palaszewski 
\par 
\par                                     NASA Lewis Research Center 
\par 
\par                                           Cleveland, OH
\par 
\par                                           February 1997
\par 
\par                                            Background
\par 
\par Gelled rocket propellants have been considered for many different applications.1-14 While operational usage has not yet come
\par to fruition, there are many technology programs that are underway to eliminate the unknowns with gelled propellants and the
\par propulsion systems that will use them. Numerous studies have shown the potential benefits of gelled fuels and oxidizers.
\par Technology programs to prove the combustion performance of gelled propellants have been conducted most recently by the
\par U.S. Army Missile Command, with their industry and university partners, for tactical missile applications. The NASA Lewis
\par Research Center and its partners have investigated O2 /H2 /Al and O2 /RP-1 /Al for NASA missions and conducted
\par experimental programs to validate elements of the combustion and fuel technology. Gelled and metallized gelled hydrogen and
\par RP-1 have been emphasized because hydrogen and RP-1 are typical propellants for NASA launch vehicles and upper stages.
\par Derivatives of these propellants are therefore preferred to minimize the incremental risk for a newly introduced propulsion
\par concept. Gelled hydrogen technology is emphasized in this paper. Its likely applications would be for rocket powered launch
\par vehicles and upper stages, rocket based combined cycle airbreathing vehicles, and combination (rocket and airbreathing)
\par propulsion options.8-17
\par 
\par                                        Why Gelled Hydrogen?
\par 
\par The benefits of gelled hydrogen have been known for many years and experimentally proven in the past.1-5 There are five
\par major benefits: safety increases, boiloff reductions, density increases with the attendant area and volume related mass
\par reductions for related subsystems (thermal protection system, structure, insulation, etc.), slosh reductions, and specific impulse
\par (Isp) increases (in some cases). 
\par 
\par Safety can be significantly increased with gelled fuels. A higher viscosity reduces the spill radius of the gelled hydrogen and
\par limits the potential damage and hazard from a fuel spill. Another important advantage is the potential for leak reduction or
\par elimination. The leak paths from the feed systems would be minimized and the possible explosion potential would be reduced. 
\par 
\par Boiloff reduction is another feature of gelled hydrogen. The boiloff reductions are up to a factor of 2 to 3 over ungelled liquid
\par hydrogen.8, 13, 14 This feature will assist in long term storage of hydrogen for upper stages that must sustain on-orbit storage
\par or long coast times. Also, lunar flight and interplanetary missions with large hydrogen fuel loads will derive a benefit. 
\par 
\par Significant density increases are possible with gelled hydrogen. A 10% density increase is possible with 10% added ethane or
\par methane. These gellants are introduced into the hydrogen as frozen particles that form a gel structure in the hydrogen.13, 14
\par Appendix A provides some additional analyses of gelled hydrogen density and performance and some additional discussion of
\par its benefits. 
\par 
\par Specific analyses of the performance gains for various missions are dependent on the vehicle and mission design. Systems
\par analyses performed for higher density hydrogen vehicles have shown that the reductions of the gross lift off weight (GLOW)
\par for increased density hydrogen are very significant. In cases where another high density hydrogen, slush hydrogen was used,
\par the density increased by 16%, the GLOW was reduced by 10.2%, or 102,000 lbm.18, 19 For airbreathing vehicles, such as
\par the National Aerospace Plane (NASP), the estimated reduction in GLOW for slush hydrogen was from 20 to 50%. Thus, a
\par gelled hydrogen with a 10% density increase may deliver a significant fraction of these GLOW reductions and other subsystem
\par mass savings.20, 21
\par 
\par                       Gelled Hydrogen Density and Specific Impulse with Methane Gellants
\par 
\par    The Isp of a gelled hydrogen powered vehicle may also increase over a liquid hydrogen powered vehicle, in some cases.
\par Figure 1 shows the Isp variations for gelled hydrogen over an methane (CH4) percentage range of 0% to 70%. This range was
\par   selected to cover the typical values of added gellant percentages investigated in past experimental work. Also, these gellant
\par    percentages may offer attractive density increases for future vehicles. Table I provides the mixture ratios for the different
\par    methane loadings. Oxygen is the oxidizer, the expansion ratio is 40:1 and the chamber pressure is 2250 psia. A 94% Isp
\par  efficiency is used to compute the delivered Isp. The maximum Isp occurs at a 5% CH4 loading and this performance level is 4
\par                                   seconds higher than ungelled O2/H2. 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par                          Figure 1: Gelled Hydrogen Rocket Engine Specific Impulse 
\par                     (Oxygen as oxidizer, 2250 psi chamber pressure, expansion ratio = 40:1)
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par                                              Table I 
\par 
\par                                Gelled H2/CH4 Mixture Ratios and Densities
\par 
\par                             CH4 Loading (wt%)
\par                                             Mixture Ratio
\par                                                         Density (kg/m3)
\par                             0.0
\par                                             6.0
\par                                                         70.00
\par                             5.0
\par                                             4.2
\par                                                         73.17
\par                             10.0
\par                                             4.2
\par                                                         76.63
\par                             15.0
\par                                             4.2
\par                                                         80.44
\par                             20.0
\par                                             4.3
\par                                                         84.65
\par                             25.0
\par                                             4.3
\par                                                         89.33
\par                             30.0
\par                                             4.3
\par                                                         94.55 
\par                             35.0
\par                                             4.2
\par                                                         100.41 
\par                             40.0
\par                                             4.3
\par                                                         107.06
\par                             45.0
\par                                             4.2
\par                                                         114.65
\par                             50.0
\par                                             4.2
\par                                                         123.39
\par                             55.0
\par                                             4.1
\par                                                         133.58
\par                             60.0
\par                                             4.1
\par                                                         145.60
\par                             65.0
\par                                             4.0
\par                                                         160.00 
\par                             70.0
\par                                             4.0
\par                                                         177.56 
\par 
\par 
\par                     ________________________________________________________ 
\par 
\par                                    Other Benefits of Gelled Hydrogen
\par 
\par For airbreathing propulsion, the largest volume of the vehicle is the hydrogen tank. Therefore, the volume reductions enabled
\par by gelled hydrogen may be significant and this effect cascades into other subsystems for significant further mass and volume
\par reductions. The subsystems that are affected are the aerodynamic thermal protection systems, cryogenic insulation, structural
\par masses, and all of the other subsystems influenced by the hydrogen fuel tankage. A higher viscosity for the gel will also reduce
\par the slosh modes in a propellant tank. Slosh baffle size and mass reductions are therefore possible by using gelled propellants.
\par These masses can be very significant for a launch vehicle application. 
\par 
\par Another option with gelled propellants is adding metal particles. Metallized gelled propellants may have modestly higher
\par specific impulses (Isp increases of 5 to 6 lbf-s/lbm for O2 /H2 /Al system, 60 wt % Al in the H2 /Al fuel) compared to
\par nonmetallized hydrogen fuels. For proposed NASA Mars evolution and expedition missions, it has been estimated that
\par metallized gelled O2 /H2 /Al propellants can result in a 20 to 33% improvement in surface payload delivery capability.11
\par More importantly for O2 /RP-1 /Al and NTO /MMH /Al propellants, adding metal can deliver considerably higher propellant
\par density, depending on the application. Hence, both the tankage mass as well as the overall propulsion system dry mass can be
\par substantially reduced. The propellant density increases and their attendant Isp changes with the aluminum additives allow a
\par payload increase of 14 to 35 percent by replacing the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster with a Liquid Rocket Booster using
\par O2 /RP-1 /Al and NTO /MMH /Al, respectively. 12
\par 
\par                                             References
\par 
\par 1) McKinney, C.D., and Tarpley, W., "Gelling of Liquid Hydrogen," Technidyne, Inc., Contract Number NAS3-4186,
\par NASA CR-54967, RR 66-49, June 1, 1966.
\par 
\par 2) Keller, C.W., "A Study of Hydrogen Slush and/or Hydrogen Gel Utilization - Vol. 1: Saturn S-4C Manned Mars Flyby
\par Vehicle Application Study", NASA CR-98936, NAS8-20342, Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., K-11-67-1K- Vol. 1,
\par October 31, 1968.
\par 
\par 3) Keller, C.W., "A Study of Hydrogen Slush and/or Hydrogen Gel Utilization -Vol. II: Test Program 41.5-inch Diameter
\par Tank", NASA CR-98935, NAS8-20342, Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., K-11-67-1K-Vol. 2, October 31, 1968.
\par 
\par 4) E. Van der Wall, "Carbon Compounds /Liquid Hydrogen Fuels", Aerojet Liquid Rocket Company Final Report, Technical
\par Report FR02-W396, October 1970, Contract SNP-1.
\par 
\par 5) "Characteristics of a Gelled Liquid Hydrogen Polyphenylene Oxide (PPO) Foam Open-Cell Insulation System," General
\par Dynamics, Report Number GDCA 632-3-169, Contract NAS8-27203, February 15, 1973.
\par 
\par 6) Wong, W., "Advanced Gellant Materials for Metallized Cryogenic Propellants," TRW Final Report, NAS3-25793,
\par September 1993.
\par 
\par 7) Wong, W., Starkovich, J., Adams, S., and Palaszewski, B., "Cryogenic Gellant and Fuel Formulation for Metallized Gelled
\par Propellants: Hydrocarbons and Hydrogen with Aluminum," AIAA 94-3175, presented at the 30th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE
\par Joint Propulsion Conference, June 1994.
\par 
\par 8) R. Wiswell and M. Huggins, "Launch Vehicle and Upper Stage Liquid Propulsion at the Astronautics Laboratory (AFSC) -
\par A History Summary", AIAA 90-1839
\par 
\par 9) Palaszewski, B., "Metallized Gelled Propellant Experiences and Lessons Learned: Oxygen /RP-1 /Aluminum Rocket Engine
\par Testing," in CPIA Publication 627, 1995 Gel Propulsion Technology Symposium, Huntsville, AL, September 1995.
\par 
\par 10) Palaszewski, B. and Zakany, J., "Metallized Gelled Propellants: Oxygen /RP-1 /Aluminum Rocket Combustion
\par Experiments," AIAA 95-2435, presented at the 31st AIAA/ASME/SAE Joint Propulsion Conference, San Diego, CA , July
\par 1995.
\par 
\par 11) B. A. Palaszewski, "Metallized Propellants for the Human Exploration of Mars", Case for Mars IV Conference, Boulder,
\par CO, June 4-8, 1990.
\par 
\par 12) Palaszewski, B. and Powell, R., "Launch Vehicle Propulsion Using Metallized Propellants," NASA-Lewis Research
\par Center, AIAA 91-2050, presented at the 27th AIAA/ASME/SAE Joint Propulsion Conference, Sacramento, CA , June
\par 24-27, 1991, also in AIAA Journal of Propulsion and Power, Vol. 10, No. 6, Nov.-Dec. 1994, pp. 828-833. 
\par 
\par 13) G. Giola, W. Chew, D. Ryder, "Propulsion Systems Hazards Evaluation and Liquid/Gel Propulsion Component
\par Development Program", Volume IV - Executive Summary, TRW, Inc., Final Report, Contract Number
\par DAAH-01086-C-0114, Technical Report CR-RD-PR-90-1, December 1989.
\par 
\par 14) N. Munjal, B. Gupta, and M. Varma, "Preparative and Mechanistic Studies on Unsymmetrical Dimethyl Hydrazine-Red
\par Fuming Nitric Acid Liquid Propellant Gels," in Propellants, Explosives, and Pyrotechnics, 10, 4, 111, 1985.
\par 
\par 15) Escher, W., Hyde, E, and Anderson, D., "A User's Primer for Comparative Assessments of All-Rocket and Rocket
\par based Combined Cycle Propulsion Systems for Advanced Earth-to-Orbit Space Transport Applications," AIAA 95-2474,
\par presented at the 31st AIAA/ASME/SAE Joint Propulsion Conference, San Diego, CA , July 1995.
\par 
\par 16) Escher, W., "Motive Power for Next Generation Space Transports: Combined Airbreathing and Rocket Propulsion,"
\par AIAA 95-6076, AIAA 6th International Aerospace Planes and Hypersonics Technologies Conference, Chattanooga, TN,
\par April 1995. 
\par 
\par 17) Siebenhaar, A., and Bulman, M., "The Strutjet Engine: The Overlooked Option for Space Launch," AIAA 95-3124,
\par presented at the 31st AIAA/ASME/SAE Joint Propulsion Conference, San Diego, CA , July 1995. 
\par 
\par 18) Elwart, R, and Dergance, R., "Cryogenic Propellant Densification Study," Martin Marietta Corp., NASA CR-159483,
\par MCR-78-586, November 1978.
\par 
\par 19) Wilhite, A., et al., "Advanced Technologies for Rocket Single Stage to Orbit Vehicles," AIAA Journal of Spacecraft and
\par Rockets, Volume 28, Number 6, November-December 1991, pp. 646-651.
\par 
\par 20) Hardy, T., and Whalen, M., "Technology Issues Associated with Using Densified Hydrogen for Space Vehicles," AIAA
\par 92-3079, AIAA 28th Joint Propulsion Conference, Nashville, TN, July 1992. 
\par 
\par 21) Friedlander, A., Zubrin, R., and Hardy, T., "Benefits of Slush Hydrogen for Space Missions," NASA Technical
\par Memorandum 104503, October 1991. 
\par 
\par 22) C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, "Sol-Gel Science," Academic Press, 1990.
\par 
\par 23) C. C. Mills, "Rheology of Disperse Systems", Pergamon Press, New York, 1959.
\par 
\par 24) D. E. Diller, "Measurement of the Viscosity of Para-Hydrogen", J. of Chem. Phys., 42 (6), 2089, 1965.
\par 
\par 25) H. E. Johns, "The Viscosity of Liquid Hydrogen, "Can. J. Res. 17A, 221, 1939.
\par 
\par 26) A. Van Itterbeek, H. Zink, and O. Van Paemel, "Viscosity Measurement in Liquefied Gases", Cryogenics, 2, 210, 1962. 
\par 
\par 27) N. S. Rudenko and V. G. Konareva, Zh. Fiz. Khim., 37, 2761, 1963. 
\par }
 