{\rtf1\ansi\deff0\deftab720{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil MS Sans Serif;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2 System;}{\f3\fnil Times New Roman;}{\f4\fnil Courier New;}}
{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;}
\deflang1033\pard\plain\f3\fs20 
\par 
\par Subject: \plain\f3\fs24\b Billings LaserCel Fuel Cell\plain\f3\fs20 
\par /* Written 4:03 am Nov 5, 1991 by leo@zelator.in-berlin.de in cdp:sci.energy
\par /* ---------- "LaserCel fuel cel is a breaktrough " ---------- *
\par Fuel cel technology might be the answer to all energy supply problems 
\par in the future.
\par Dr. Roger E. Billings and his fellow researchers at the American Academy
\par of Science have demonstrated a new fuel cel called LaserCel ! 
\par With this LaserCel integrated in an Ford Fiesta car they have demonstrated
\par a real alternative versus the old combustion machine.
\par The new fuel cel has a lifetime of at least 400000 Km and should cost about
\par 3000 Dollars. It is not much bigger than an 14 Inch Computer monitor and
\par is build totaly from plastics.
\par It's efficiency is said to be 60 to 80 %. Combined with a metall-hydrid-tank 
\par the car can be refilled in only 5 minutes !!!
\par It's power can run the Ford Fiesta car to 130 KM/H and the range is 500 Km.
\par But the best thing is still to come: The LaserCel can be used as a
\par electrolysis machine. Hooked 8 hours to Your wall outlet one can recharge
\par the metallhydrid-tank with hydrogen so one don't have to drive to the refill-
\par station !
\par The Lasercel consists of Polytetraflurethylen (PTFE) in proton -exchange-
\par membran technology and have reached a power versus mass factor of
\par 1 Kg/kW. Until now there were factors of 10 Kg/KW.
\par LaserCel is produced with a high energy laser to get the right plastics, so
\par this is the reason for the name.
\par For operation the LaserCel is filled with normal water. Then Hydrogen and
\par air is supplied to this 300 mm tall and 250 mm in diameter "power-station". 
\par In this way it's producing 17.5 KW DC power !!!
\par Waste product is only clean water !
\par LaserCel is simple to operate and needs no handling. 
\par 
\par 1993 should be the year of the beginning of mass production of this fuel cell.
\par This information was given in VDI-Nachrichten Nr. 27 from the 5th of July 91.
\par If anybody of the "netlanders" has some more information of the system.
\par please post it to the net and email it to me. Thanks.
\par 
\par Dr. Roger E. Billings has demonstrated the technology in Harrisburg,Pennsylyania 
\par /USA and is currently negotiating with General Motors for their car "IMPACT"
\par to include the technology for mass production.
\par Subject: Billings LaserCel Fuel Cell
\par /* Written 6:03 am Nov 9, 1991 by leo@zelator.in-berlin.de in cdp:sci.energy 
\par 
\par /* ---------- "LaserCel fuel cel is a breaktrough " ---------- * 
\par 
\par /In <JMC.91Nov6173553@SAIL.Stanford.EDU> jmc@SAIL.Stanford.EDU (John McCarthy) wr 
\par 
\par ites:
\par 
\par FUEL CELLS FOR URBAN POWER
\par 
\par =============================
\par 
\par The Story in Brief
\par 
\par Producing electricity electrochemically -- without combustion -
\par fuel cells are ideal for serving power generation needs in urban 
\par settings. While units based on phosphoric acid technology are now
\par operating successfully in Japan, the fuel cells most likely to be
\par used in the United States are based on more advanced, molten
\par carbonate designs, which offer higher efficiencies, greater
\par compactness, and potentially lower cost. To speed the
\par commercialization of fuel cells in this country, EPRI and the 
\par American Public Power Association sponsored an international
\par competition in 1988 to design a fuel cell tailored to urban needs. 
\par The winner, a 2-MW molten carbonate fuel cell, will be produced 
\par under an innovative commercialization plan that will include
\par completion of a demonstration plant by 1994, shared risks for early
\par production units, and shared royalties on future sales for
\par utilities that become involved in the early efforts.
\par ============================
\par 
\par Supplying electric power to congested urban areas is like trying to
\par solve a Chinese puzzle ball: multiple barriers have to be
\par manipulated simultaneously, and the closer one gets to the center, 
\par the more complicated the whole process becomes. Consider the
\par constraints facing today's municipal utility planner --
\par increasingly tight emission controls, rising fuel costs, mounting 
\par resistance to expanding or upgrading transmission lines,
\par lengthening construction times, shrinking land availability, and, 
\par in some cases, deteriorating system performance.
\par 
\par For more than two decades, the conceptually simple and
\par environmentally attractive fuel cell has seemed to offer a
\par technological solution to each of these problems. Compact, quiet, 
\par highly efficient, and exceptionally clean, fuel cell modules can bc
\par installed as needed on available urban sites, without the need to
\par invest in large remote power plants and upgraded transmission 
\par lines. In addition, they respond well to load changes, can be used
\par to correct power factor degradation in the urban grid, and offer 
\par considerable flexibility in the choice of fuel.
\par 
\par Spurred on by fuel cells' promise for small-scale urban
\par applications, a group of utilities built and field-tested 12.5-kW 
\par fuel cell power plants in the early 1970s, and by 1977 a 1-MW pilot
\par plant had been successfully demonstrated. Over the next decade, 
\par however, commercialization efforts ran into unexpected
\par difficulties.
\par 
\par In 1988, the American Public Power Association (APPA) and EPRI 
\par decided to tackle the commercialization problem head-on.
\par Alternative fuel cell technologies and developers had become
\par available, and supply problems for municipal utilities -- many of
\par which are members of APPA -- had grown more urgent. APPA issued a
\par "Notice of Market Opportunity" (NOMO), which essentially offered
\par volume sales for the winner of an international competition to 
\par design a commercialization program tailored to urban needs. EPRI 
\par helped choose the winning technology -- a 2-MW molten carbonate 
\par design -- and is now participating in its further development and
\par demonstration.
\par 
\par Power Without Fire
\par 
\par Unlike conventional generation systems, fuel cells employ an 
\par 
\par electrochemical process -- that is, they convert fuel energy to 
\par 
\par electricity through flameless oxidation. Skipping the combustion 
\par 
\par step makes the conversion process much more efficient than using a 
\par 
\par boiler to raise steam. It is also much cleaner: the main emissions 
\par 
\par from a fuel cell are water vapor and carbon dioxide.
\par 
\par As in a battery, an electric current is created by a fuel cell when 
\par 
\par chemical reactions release electrons at one electrode and absorb 
\par 
\par them at another. The difference is that the electrodes of a battery 
\par 
\par themselves provide the "fuel" and oxidizer and so are consumed by 
\par 
\par the chemical reactions. In a fuel cell, gaseous fuel (such as 
\par 
\par hydrogen, natural gas, coal gas, methanol, or naphtha) and oxygen 
\par 
\par (either from the air or purified) flow through porous electrodes, 
\par 
\par which are only slightly affected by the reactions.
\par 
\par Some of the technical challenges facing fuel cell developers are 
\par 
\par inherent. Each pair of electrodes can create an electric potential 
\par 
\par of only up to 1.23 volts, so many pairs are required for generating 
\par 
\par voltages useful for power-related applications. Current is 
\par 
\par proportional to the surface area of the electrodes, which means 
\par 
\par that large plates (about 1 meter square) with porous surfaces must 
\par 
\par be used. Expensive catalysts are required in low-temperature fuel 
\par 
\par cells to help accelerate the normally sluggish reactions, but these 
\par 
\par are not needed at high temperatures. And the electrolyte -- the 
\par 
\par medium for carrying current inside a fuel cell -- is a relatively 
\par 
\par poor conductor, so electrolyte-filled membranes separating 
\par 
\par electrodes are made as thin as possible.
\par 
\par Different kinds of fuel cells are usually named according to the 
\par 
\par type of electrolyte they use. Three major kinds are now being 
\par 
\par actively developed for utility applications: phosphoric acid fuel 
\par 
\par cells (PAFCs), the most highly developed, with major demonstration 
\par 
\par plants in operation; molten carbonate fuel cells (MCFCs), now 
\par 
\par entering the demonstration phase of development; and solid oxide 
\par 
\par fuel cells (SOFCs), which are still in the experimental stage. 
\par 
\par Developing Technology for the U.S. Market
\par 
\par Phosphoric acid fuel cells, which operate at about 200 degrees C 
\par 
\par with power generation efficiency of 35-45%, were first operated at 
\par 
\par utility scale at Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO) in 1983. The 
\par 
\par world's largest fuel cell, an 11-MW PAFC, is currently operating at 
\par 
\par TEPCO, in addition to several smaller units (see sidebar).
\par 
\par Europe is also pursuing the PAFC option, with a 1-MW PAFC 
\par 
\par demonstration plant scheduled to begin operation in Milan later 
\par 
\par this year. The project, sponsored by the Milan Municipal Energy 
\par 
\par Authority (Aem) and the Italian energy agency (ENEA), incorporates 
\par 
\par fuel cell stacks manufactured by International Fuel Cells Company 
\par 
\par (IFC) of the United States, which also produced the stacks used in 
\par 
\par the 11-MW TEPCO unit. EPRI has an information exchange agreement 
\par 
\par with Aem and is particularly interested in operational data about 
\par 
\par the performance and durability of an EPRI-developed fuel processor 
\par 
\par utilized in the project.
\par 
\par United States electric utilities, on the other hand, are not 
\par 
\par currently pursuing the PAFC option. "U.S. market conditions simply 
\par 
\par didn't favor a new technology when phosphoric acid fuel cells were 
\par 
\par first offered," says project manager Daniel Rastler, who has been 
\par 
\par monitoring the TEPCO efforts. "As a result, the Japanese certainly 
\par 
\par have an early lead in fuel cell commercialization. But as the U.S. 
\par 
\par rekindles its commercialization efforts, it will focus on 
\par 
\par leapfrogging the PAFC alternative and investing in the more 
\par 
\par advanced molten carbonate technology."
\par 
\par Although phosphoric acid cells are clearly ahead of other fuel cell 
\par 
\par technologies in being field-ready, they do have some disadvantages 
\par 
\par that the more advanced options don't. The most important is that 
\par 
\par PAFCs need an external fuel processor to enhance the hydrogen 
\par 
\par content of the fuel before it enters the cell. In a "reformer" 
\par 
\par section of this fuel processor, combustion is needed to heat a 
\par 
\par mixture of natural gas and steam, which react in the presence of a 
\par 
\par catalyst to form hydrogen and carbon monoxide. A "shift converter" 
\par 
\par section then reacts the carbon monoxide and steam to generate more 
\par 
\par hydrogen, also by using a catalyst. The need for a combustion-based 
\par 
\par fuel processor lowers the efficiency of a PAFC and increases its 
\par 
\par cost. Also, the reformer vessel is one of the largest components of 
\par 
\par a complete PAFC facility, requiring special handling and increasing 
\par 
\par the facility's "footprint" -- the amount of floor space it 
\par 
\par occupies.
\par 
\par Because molten carbonate fuel cells operate at a high temperature - 
\par 
\par - about 1200 degrees F -- reforming can take place inside the cell, 
\par 
\par without the need for any combustion to sustain the conversion 
\par 
\par reactions. Such internal reforming enables the MCFC to achieve 
\par 
\par exceptionally high efficiency with extremely low emissions. The 
\par 
\par absence of a separate reformer vessel also reduces the fuel cell's 
\par 
\par footprint. This simplicity of design is expected to make MCFCs more 
\par 
\par reliable and eventually less expensive than PAFC alternatives. 
\par 
\par Because of these technical advantages and the commercialization 
\par 
\par strategy proposed, the NOMO reviewers chose a 2-MW MCFC designed by 
\par 
\par Energy Research Corporation (ERC) of Danbury, Connecticut, for 
\par 
\par support under the APPA/EPRI commercialization initiative. Although 
\par 
\par not as fully developed as PAFC technology, MCFCs have recently 
\par 
\par achieved some key technical milestones. Full-area cells (about 4 
\par 
\par square feet) and tall stacks (with 60 cells each) have been 
\par 
\par successfully demonstrated. The next step is verification and 
\par 
\par durability testing of the first fully integrated 100-kW MCFC 
\par 
\par system. Such tests began in June 1991 at the Research Center of 
\par 
\par Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E), in San Ramon, California. 
\par 
\par The MCFC design chosen for commercial demonstration will have a 
\par 
\par fuel-to-electricity energy conversion efficiency of 54-60%, 
\par 
\par (5700-6300 Btu/kWh). With a footprint of less than 4500 square 
\par 
\par feet, the fuel cell would easily fit within the area of a tennis 
\par 
\par court, making it ideal for urban service areas. The nominal 2-MW 
\par 
\par plant can also operate over a wide power range -- from about 25% to 
\par 
\par 125% of rating -- depending on utility load requirements. This type 
\par 
\par of advanced fuel cell has been under development by ERC for the 
\par 
\par past 10 years, with support from the U.S. Department of Energy, 
\par 
\par EPRI, and PG&E. Negotiations for siting the first 2-MW 
\par 
\par demonstration unit are under way with the city of Santa Clara, 
\par 
\par California, and a consortium of other utilities.
\par 
\par Because both phosphoric acid and molten carbonate are highly 
\par 
\par corrosive, a particular challenge in developing these fuel cells 
\par 
\par has been to find materials that can withstand prolonged exposure to 
\par 
\par these chemicals. A solid oxide fuel cell avoids this problem by 
\par 
\par using a zirconium oxide ceramic material as the electrolyte. Such 
\par 
\par solid-state construction promises to make SOFCs exceptionally 
\par 
\par compact and lightweight -- offering even more flexibility in size 
\par 
\par and siting. In addition, with an operating temperature of around 
\par 
\par 1800 degrees F, SOFCs could produce higher-temperature steam than 
\par 
\par MCFCs and thus provide useful heat for a wider variety of 
\par 
\par cogeneration applications. The SOFC design can also produce 
\par 
\par concentrated carbon dioxide, which could -- in principle -- be 
\par 
\par captured and sequestered, should concern over the greenhouse effect 
\par 
\par become a dominant consideration.
\par 
\par SOFCs are expected to have a lower efficiency, however, and thus 
\par 
\par the technology will probably find use first as a topping cycle for 
\par 
\par an expansion turbine, replacing the combustion stage of a 
\par 
\par conventional gas turbine. The technology is also the least 
\par 
\par developed of the three types of fuel cell currently being 
\par 
\par considered for utility use. Tests have so far been conducted on 25- 
\par 
\par kW units, and preparations are under way for building a 100-kW 
\par 
\par pilot plant within a year or so. Development challenges center on 
\par 
\par the thermal stresses imposed on numerous thin layers of fragile 
\par 
\par ceramic material in the high-temperature environment of SOFCs. EPRI 
\par 
\par intends to support the research needed to determine the feasibility 
\par 
\par of this technology and to monitor early SOFC installations, 
\par 
\par providing technical and economic data to member utilities.
\par 
\par "I expect that each fuel cell technology will eventually find its 
\par 
\par niche," says fuel cell program manager Ed Gillis. "Phosphoric acid 
\par 
\par cells have some advantages for cycling duty. MCFCs are the most 
\par 
\par efficient and will probably be used for baseload operation. Solid 
\par 
\par oxide units still face some fundamental technology development 
\par 
\par issues, but if these are resolved, the units could eventually be 
\par 
\par quite attractive for very small installations."
\par 
\par The Commercialization Process
\par 
\par EPRI studies indicate that the near-term market for 2-MW MCFC power 
\par 
\par plants is conservatively 12,000 to 14,000 MW -- at a new- 
\par 
\par installation rate of 900 MW per year, once commercialization is 
\par 
\par achieved. Early applications will probably include dense urban 
\par 
\par areas facing severe environmental constraints, substation upgrades, 
\par 
\par and cogeneration opportunities in industrial parks.
\par 
\par Under the APPA/EPRI commercialization plan, construction of early 
\par 
\par demonstration units is expected to begin by mid-1993. If these 
\par 
\par demonstrations are successful and if utility commitments have been 
\par 
\par received within a three-year solicitation period for 100 MW or more 
\par 
\par of early production units, ERC has agreed to build a commercial- 
\par 
\par scale manufacturing facility capable of producing about 400 MW of 
\par 
\par MCFC units per year. The target price of early production units is 
\par 
\par $1500/kW (1989 dollars). Purchasers of these early power plants 
\par 
\par would then receive royalties from the sale of future commercial 
\par 
\par units, which are expected to have prices closer to $1000/kW (1989 
\par 
\par dollars).
\par 
\par "The commercialization plan offers a solution to the dilemma of how 
\par 
\par to attract enough buyers to raise production, when you need volume 
\par 
\par production to make prices attractive," says Ed Gillis. "The key is 
\par 
\par risk sharing. Orders for early production units do not require any 
\par 
\par financial commitment by a utility for at least three years, and 
\par 
\par commitments do not become firm unless the prototype demonstration 
\par 
\par plant performs successfully. In addition, there is the incentive of 
\par 
\par shared royalties from future sales and the ability to influence 
\par 
\par product design in its early stages."
\par 
\par The new market will need more sophisticated assessment tools if the 
\par 
\par true economic value of dispersed generation units, such as fuel 
\par 
\par cells, is to be accounted for. Such an approach involves not only 
\par 
\par comparing direct capital costs but also considering appropriate 
\par 
\par avoided costs -- such as transmission lines not built because a 
\par 
\par dispersed generation unit could be installed close to a demand 
\par 
\par center.
\par 
\par EPRI has recently been working with the Los Angeles Department of 
\par 
\par Water & Power (LADWP) to develop an assessment methodology 
\par 
\par appropriate for dispersed generation. The initial phase of this 
\par 
\par work looks specifically at the benefits of installing 2-MW MCFCs at 
\par 
\par selected load centers. Among the benefits to be assessed are 
\par 
\par support for spinning reserve, improved load-following capability, 
\par 
\par enhanced distribution reliability, the potential for cogeneration, 
\par 
\par and environmental savings. A similar study was recently conducted 
\par 
\par by PG&E to evaluate the benefits of another type of dispersed 
\par 
\par supply option -- photovoltaics.
\par 
\par "The bottom line is that dispersed siting of some fuel cell 
\par 
\par installations will be economical -- compared with other options -- 
\par 
\par at $1500/kW, once you look at the full spectrum of benefits and 
\par 
\par avoided costs," Dan Rastler concludes. "Such attributes are very 
\par 
\par site-specific, however; our methodology helps utilities calculate 
\par 
\par the value of energy loss savings or deferred transmission and 
\par 
\par distribution facilities for particular cases. Distributed 
\par 
\par generation will complement central station power plants, not 
\par 
\par replace them. An expanded version of the assessment tool we're 
\par 
\par developing with LADWP could eventually be applied to photovoltaics, 
\par 
\par storage, and demand-side management, as well as fuel cells. The 
\par 
\par idea is to have a fully integrated analysis."
\par 
\par Looking Ahead
\par 
\par "As a long-term strategy, we expect coal gasification to replace 
\par 
\par natural gas as a source of primary energy for fuel cells," says 
\par 
\par George Preston, EPRI's vice president for generation and storage. 
\par 
\par MCFC technology is particularly suited for this duty, since it 
\par 
\par integrates best with the gasifier. EPRI has a project under way 
\par 
\par with Dow Chemical to test a 20-kW MCFC at the company's Plaquemine 
\par 
\par gasification facility.
\par 
\par Although the electricity generation demand for natural gas -- now 
\par 
\par used mostly in combustion turbines -- is expected to double by the 
\par 
\par year 2000, only a fraction of this gas is being supplied on a firm, 
\par 
\par noninterruptible basis. There is reasonable probability that within 
\par 
\par a decade gas prices will rise substantially, perhaps to a level of 
\par 
\par $4-$5 per thousand cubic feet, which is the expected future cost of 
\par 
\par coal-derived synthetic gas. Fuel cells are much more efficient than 
\par 
\par turbines in utilizing either natural or coal-derived synthetic gas.
\par [EARTH HOUR][RA ENERGY ] [HYDROGEN ECONOMY] [C21-CITY SCAPE] [CONSTITUTION] 
\par 
\par [PREMISE] [INDEX TOPICS] [LINKS] [EMAIL]
\par 
\par The 1990 amendments to the Clean Air Act will also play a role in 
\par 
\par making the combination of coal gasification and fuel cell 
\par 
\par generation more attractive. Over the next few years, utilities are 
\par 
\par required to halve their sulfur oxide emissions and to reduce 
\par 
\par nitrogen oxide emissions by 30%. After 2000, total emissions will 
\par 
\par be capped, and utilities will be issued emissions allowances that 
\par 
\par can be traded among "clean" and "dirty" plants. Since gasification 
\par 
\par is by far the cleanest way to utilize coal, and fuel cells are by 
\par 
\par far the most efficient way to generate power from the synthetic 
\par 
\par gas, the combination of these two advanced technologies will offer 
\par 
\par an especially attractive way for utilities to stay below the new 
\par 
\par emissions cap.
\par 
\par "We believe that gasification-based coal technologies will become 
\par 
\par increasingly important, first for environmental reasons and then 
\par 
\par for economic ones," says Ron Wolk, director of EPRI's Advanced 
\par 
\par Fossil Power Systems Department. "The molten carbonate fuel cell 
\par 
\par combined with a gasifier is the cleanest, most efficient coal power 
\par 
\par plant now foreseeable. It is thus vitally important that the MCFC 
\par 
\par technology be commercialized as soon as possible, with units using 
\par 
\par natural gas, so that the coming transition to gasification systems 
\par 
\par can be as smooth as possible."
\par 
\par =========================
\par 
\par UTILITY FUEL CELLS IN JAPAN
\par 
\par The first fuel cell to enter commercial-scale utility operation was 
\par 
\par a 4.5-MW unit that went on-line at the Goi thermal power station of 
\par 
\par Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO) in 1983 and generated power 
\par 
\par until 1985. This phosphoric acid fuel cell (PAFC) was one of two 
\par 
\par built in the early 1980s as utility prototype demonstration plants. 
\par 
\par The other unit was in New York City, but delays associated with the 
\par 
\par approval process were so lengthy that by the time it was cleared 
\par 
\par for operation, in 1984, the fuel cell stacks had deteriorated and 
\par 
\par never produced power.
\par 
\par Currently, the world's largest fuel cell is an 11-MW PAFC at the 
\par 
\par Goi station, located in Ichihara City on the rapidly developing 
\par 
\par north shore of Tokyo Bay. According to TEPCO, this unit supplies 
\par 
\par enough power for about 4000 households. Fuel cell installations in 
\par 
\par Japan generally operate as cogenerators, providing useful heat 
\par 
\par energy as well as electricity. Waste heat from the Goi 11-MW unit 
\par 
\par can meet the air conditioning demands of 300 households or the 
\par 
\par heating requirements of 1300 households.
\par 
\par The 11-MW fuel cell plant was constructed by Toshiba Corp. with 
\par 
\par fuel cell stacks manufactured by International Fuel Cells Company 
\par 
\par (IFC) of the United States. Power generation at the plant began in 
\par 
\par March 1991. Through an agreement with TEPCO, EPRI will receive 
\par 
\par plant performance and operational data and have access to the site 
\par 
\par after key project milestones. The first of these site visits by 
\par 
\par EPRI staff and representatives of EPRI member utilities took place 
\par 
\par in March 1990. EPRI has also developed a computer-aided diagnostic 
\par 
\par tool that will help TEPCO plant operators in troubleshooting and 
\par 
\par isolating system faults.
\par 
\par The Japanese government expects that 1900 MW of fuel cell capacity 
\par 
\par will be installed by the year 2000. Much of this will be dispersed 
\par 
\par generation built to supply power for new commercial developments 
\par 
\par going up around Tokyo Bay. If the reliability of the Goi plant is 
\par 
\par confirmed, Toshiba plans to produce more 11-MW units at the rate of 
\par 
\par about 20 per year, with declining cost, higher efficiency, and a 
\par 
\par smaller footprint.
\par 
\par As well as building large-capacity fuel cell facilities, TEPCO has 
\par 
\par taken the lead in demonstrating smaller PAFC units for on-site use 
\par 
\par in commercial developments and industrial parks. As part of this 
\par 
\par program, the world's first 200-kW packaged fuel cell plant, also 
\par 
\par developed by IFC, began experimental operation at a TEPCO facility 
\par 
\par in 1988. The next year, a similar unit was the first fuel cell 
\par 
\par cogenerator installed in a commercial building.
\par 
\par =========================
\par 
\par THE SUPERFLEXIBLE POWER TECHNOLOGY
\par 
\par SITING: Because fuel cell power plants cover only a small area and 
\par 
\par produce very low emissions, they can be sited near centers of load 
\par 
\par growth, including congested urban centers.
\par 
\par FUEL FLEXIBILITY: Although early commercial units will be fueled 
\par 
\par with natural gas, it is expected that molten carbonate fuel cells 
\par 
\par will eventually use gas produced by the gasification of coal -- by 
\par 
\par far the cleanest way of using this fossil fuel.
\par 
\par EFFICIENCY: Fuel cells are the most efficient means of generating 
\par 
\par electric power from fossil fuels, with the conversion efficiency 
\par 
\par for MCFCs approaching 60%.
\par 
\par DISPATCH: Fuel cells can respond to load changes in seconds -- 
\par 
\par which makes them perfect for serving peak loads -- and function 
\par 
\par efficiently at either full or partial power.
\par 
\par MODULARITY: The first commercial MCFC plants will be available in 
\par 
\par 2-MW modules, so utilities can add single units quickly as demand 
\par 
\par growth warrants.
\par 
\par T&D DEFERRAL: Adding or upgrading transmission and distribution 
\par 
\par facilities in urban areas is becoming more difficult; installation 
\par 
\par of a small fuel cell power plant offers an attractive alternative. 
\par }
 