{\rtf1\ansi\deff0\deftab720{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil MS Sans Serif;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2 System;}{\f3\fnil Times New Roman;}{\f4\fnil Courier New;}}
{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;}
\deflang1033\pard\plain\f3\fs40\b Fuel from water
\par \plain\f3\fs20 
\par Berit Pegg-Karlsson in Polperro, Cornwall, is the Swedish-born director of the British-Scandinavian Association for Wind and
\par Hydrogen Power, backed by the Pure Energy Trust, of which self-sufficiency writer John Seymour is the main trustee.
\par Pegg-Karlsson plans to popularise in Britain the very successful hydrogen 'Welgas' experiment financed in the town of
\par Harnosand by the Swedish steel industry, SAAB and other firms. In Harnosand, Olaf Tegstrom designed and lived in a house
\par where the electricity came from a small computer-controlled Danish windmill in the garden. The electricity was used to
\par electrolyse filtered water into its constituents, hydrogen and oxygen, with the hydrogen gas used for cooking and heating the
\par house and as fuel for a SAAB car. The car is non-polluting as the exhaust consists almost entirely of water vapour, and the
\par safe storage problem has been solved, with the gas absorbed to form a metal hydride and released as required. Indeed in
\par West Berlin, thanks to government subsidies for fuels that did not cause acid rain, Daimler Benz has built a filling station where
\par various converted vehicles can be filled with hydrogen, produced from town gas.
\par 
\par 'The electricity was used to electrolyse filtered water into its constituents, hydrogen and oxygen, with the hydrogen
\par                   gas used for cooking and heating the house and as fuel for a SAAB car'
\par 
\par Sooner or later, Pegg-Karlsson believes, hydrogen will become the world's prime provider of energy, a technological
\par revolution that would solve the problem of atmospheric pollution, at the same time as gradually replacing nuclear power.
\par Hydrogen is an excellent fuel with an energy content three to four times higher than oil, and it can be produced from all known
\par energy sources, besides being a by-product of many industrial processes. 
\par 
\par Having hosted seminars for scientists and others on the subject in Sweden, Pegg-Karlsson now wants to do the same in
\par Britain, and the city council of Uppsala in Sweden is interested in forming links with a British city such as Bristol, to share ideas
\par and to conduct joint hydrogen projects. The Pure Energy Trust is also attempting to obtain funding for a minibus to run on
\par hydrogen derived from a 20kw wind turbine and electrolysis unit. 
\par 
\par                 'Hydrogen power is Jules Vernes' old dream come true - using water as a fuel'
\par 
\par Pegg-Karlsson is enthusiastic about her Association's potential: 'Humanity can today create what a few years ago was thought
\par of as a very distant future society. And it's all about positive development, caring for the earth and taking steps towards a
\par sustainable future society. Hydrogen power is Jules Vernes' old dream come true - using water as a fuel. The technology is
\par already available. It is largely a question of people and politicians taking brave decisions.' 
\par 
\par Also working in the field of alternative, renewable energy sources is John Allan, who promotes ethical and
\par environmental approaches to the subject. He can be contacted at Energy Solutions, 2 Clarence Place, London E5
\par 8HN (tel 0181 986 3963; fax 0181 985 1379).
\par 
\par A hydrogen car at less than 1p a mile
\par 
\par Adapted from an article in the Daily Mail by Michael Kemp and in the Times by Kevin Eason.
\par 
\par A new fuel cell, patented as the Laser-Cell-TM, costing \'a32,000, has been developed by Dr Roger Billings (who invented the
\par first home personal computer and double-sided floppy disk). When his fuel cell is plugged into the electric mains it extracts
\par hydrogen from water over an eight hour period and stores the gas harmlessly in powdered metals, where it cannot explode or
\par ignite. 
\par 
\par The fuel cell can then be switched into 'reverse' and turn the hydrogen into electricity to power the electric motor driving the
\par car. Dr Billings' invention could have much wider applications, using hydrogen for home electrical needs and for trucks, buses,
\par trains, boats, submarines and aircraft. 
\par 
\par The cell is a third the size of a Fiesta petrol engine and has no moving parts, nothing to service and a life of over 250,000 miles.
\par 60 to 80 per cent of the hydrogen is turned into electricity, compared with the fuel-to-power ratio of a petrol engine of 30 per
\par cent. 
\par 
\par    'Fast and quiet, a hydrogen car costs less than 1p a mile to run and is also environmentally friendly. The only
\par                                       exhaust is water vapour'
\par 
\par Fast and quiet, a hydrogen car costs less than 1p a mile to run and is also environmentally friendly. The only exhaust is water
\par vapour. A model using the new technology could be on sale for under \'a320,000 by 1993. 
\par 
\par A petrol-driven Fiesta costs 33.5p a mile to run but in the prototype hydrogen vehicle, two gallons of water provide enough
\par hydrogen for a 300-mile drive and the car has a potential top speed of 80mph. 
\par 
\par Dr Roger Billings, Director, Academy of Science, Kansas, USA.
\par 
\par Hydrogen-powered cars to run on diesel not water
\par 
\par Adapted extracts from an article by Jeremy Webb, entitled 'Electric cars may run on diesel', in New Scientist (Oct 14th
\par '96).
\par 
\par The first cars driven by fuel cells may not be all that green, as they are likely to use diesel as a source of their hydrogen. With
\par the race on to put a non-polluting prototype into production, car designers want to know what fuel they will be using.
\par 
\par The ideal scenario is one in which electricity from solar panels and wind turbines is used to 'crack' water and produce
\par hydrogen. (See above.) But in the short term it suffers from several drawbacks; public anxiety since the Hindenberg disaster
\par about the safety of hydrogen is one obstacle, and there are also technical problems: storage tanks will need to be both large
\par and sturdy, pushing up the price, and an efficient, readily available source of hydrogen is still some way off.
\par 
\par One option for the transitional period while hydrogen production and storage is made more efficient is to use a fuel such as
\par methanol or natural gas, which can be processed in the car to make hydrogen. The disadvantage with both these fuels is that
\par there is a very limited network of filling stations. And if hydrogen is likely to supersede them in a few years, nobody is likely to
\par invest in expanding the network.
\par 
\par This leaves diesel, which can be partially oxidised in the car to produce hydrogen with negligible emissions of nitrogen oxides.
\par (To reduce sulphur dioxides, sulphur would need to be removed at the refinery). But the real advantage is that filling stations
\par can already handle diesel.
\par 
\par Whatever the fuel, "the creation of a new fuel infrastructure will have to be progressive," according to Keith Prater of Canadian
\par company Ballard, producers of a fuel cell-driven bus. "There will have to be some government intervention to encourage it."
\par He points to Vancouver, where ten years ago the taxis changed to burning natural gas. The infrastructure was minimal - just
\par installed at depots. But then the state government began offering state subsidies to people who converted their cars to natural
\par gas. "There are now natural gas stations all around the state, so taxis and cars can refuel anywhere."
\par 
\par Latest developments in Zero Emission Vehicle technology
\par 
\par ).
\par 
\par Adapted extracts from an e-mail to the Institute by Ben Lane, an Energy and Transport consultant conducting
\par research into hydrogen and other transport fuels which can be produced using renewable energy. Also includes
\par information from a story by Nick Nuttall, entitled 'Hydrogen cars will end smog', in The Times (Jan 7th '97and and
\par another by Rob Edwards, entitled 'A tank of the cold stuff', in New Scientist (Nov 23rd '96). California's Palm Desert
\par Project is currently at work on a project showcasing the complete ZEV concept. A central filling station, supplying
\par fully-renewable hydrogen produced from solar cells and wind-turbines, fuels a fleet of five personal cars (20km/h, range
\par 32km), and three neighbourhood vehicles, (65 km/h, range 160km). The vehicles can refuel in less than 2 minutes and provide
\par an equivalent of 130 mpg.
\par 
\par BMW has six hydrogen-fuelled cars on the road. It looks much like a conventional BMW. Indeed, the engine itself can even
\par run on petrol on the occasions when the car is out of range of a hydrogen supply. Flicking a switch next to the gear lever,
\par however, switches the fuel injection from petrol to hydrogen, stored in a parallel tank. The parallel set-up cannot quite compete
\par with the petrol engine in its performance but, with a top speed of 210kph and 150 horsepower, it should be sufficient to satisfy
\par all but the most impatient autobahn driver. 
\par 
\par Most encouraging of all, according to Ben Lane, is Daimler-Benz's New Electric Car (NECAR), unveiled in May '96. With a
\par top speed of 110 km/h, and a range of 250km, its performance is equivalent to a conventional petrol vehicle. This makes it
\par very likely to gain acceptance by the general public, and it may be ready for commercial production within ten years. 
\par 
\par In January '97 another hat was thrown into the zero emissions ring, in the shape of a Chrysler model, which uses as 'reformer'
\par turning low-octane petrol into hydrogen for a fuel cell. Prompted by pressure from American clean-air legislation, Chrysler
\par hope to have their vehicle on the market by 2006. 
\par 
\par Ben Lane, Flat 4, 37 Cornwallis Crescent, Clifton, Bristol BS8 4PH (tel 0117 9732986; e-mail:
\par BML5@tutor.open.ac.uk).
\par 
\par Further information may be obtained by visting the websites for the Palm Desert Project ; Mercedes-Benz research news
\par for the latest on the NECAR; and the site for the American Hydrogen Association
\par 
\par Ben Lane's recommended further reading on the subject. includes two books, Solar Hydrogen Energy by J. Bockris, T.
\par Veziroglu, D. Smith (Optima), "a very good introduction to hydrogen philosophy for non-scientists"; and The Keys to
\par the Car by J. Mackenzie (World Resources Institute), which presents a detailed comparison of hydrogen and electric
\par vehicles.
\par 
\par Other organisations involved in hydrogen energy research include 
\par    American Academy of Science, 26900 East Pink Hill Road, Independence, MO 64057, USA (tel 00 1 816 229 3800).
\par    American Hydrogen Association, PO Box 15075, Phoenix, AZ 85060 or: 219 South Siesta Lane, Suite 101, Tempe,
\par AZ 85281, USA (tel 00 1 602 921 0433; fax 00 1 602 967 6601). 
\par    Centre for Electrochemical Systems and Hydrogen Research, Texas A and M University, Mail Stop 3402, College
\par Station, TX 77843-3577; (tel 00 1 409 845 0424). 
\par    Citizens for Clean Energy, Attn. Stephen J Clark, PO Box 17147, Boulder, CO 80308, USA (tel 00 1 303 443 6181)
\par    Clean Energy Research Institute, University of Miami, PO Box 248294, Coral Gables, FL 33124, USA. 
\par    Electric Power Research Instititute, Generation and Storage Division, 3412 Hillview Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94304,
\par USA (tel 00 1 415 855 2000). 
\par    Hydrogen Consultants, Inc., 12420 North Dumont Way, Littleton, CO 80125, USA (tel 00 1 303 791 7972). 
\par    Hydrogen Industry Council, 1801 McGill College Avenue, Suite 920, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2N4 (tel 00 1
\par 514 288 5139; fax 00 1 514 843 6079). 
\par    National Hydrogen Association, Suite 910, 1101 Connecticut Avenue, NW, Washington DC 20036, USA (tel 00 1
\par 202 223 5547). 
\par }
 