{\rtf1\ansi\deff0\deftab720{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil MS Sans Serif;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset2 Symbol;}{\f2\fswiss\fprq2 System;}{\f3\fnil Times New Roman;}{\f4\fnil Courier New;}}
{\colortbl\red0\green0\blue0;}
\deflang1033\pard\plain\f3\fs20 
\par                                                           
\par 
\par \plain\f3\fs40\b                        ENERGY SUPPRESSION. \plain\f3\fs20 
\par 
\par  Time magazine (Aust) 17 july 1995 (p.46) are rounding up the future technologies that are going to severely change the world
\par   as we know it. They correctly point out that a change in the usage of energy would have a massive impact, but then promise
\par   "The first company to design an affordable car that doesn't foul the atmosphere will race past it's competitors." Not only are
\par  they totaly wrong, but they're probably lying. The simple fact is the technology has been with us for most of this past century,
\par           it's just that it wouldn't be economicaly rational (for the oil companies) to allow the public to utilise it. 
\par 
\par  My story began late one night driving home listening to talk back radio, when somebody piped up that they'd been working on
\par  a solar-powered car out at the local airport, and it was ready to go and as cheap and as safe as an average family car - except
\par  that you would only need about five dollars worth of fuel per year to get it started. The startled D.J. then asked when were we
\par likely to see it in the market place, and the engineer cooly replied "probably never, I'd say the oil companies will buy us out in a
\par   flash." I nearly crashed my car- what on earth was going on here? The next day I rang the airport to find out who was doing
\par the testing only to find out from an assertive voice, "there are no automobiles being tested here and there never has been." Fine,
\par               the dead end proved to be the spark of detirmination to send me on my investigative way. 
\par 
\par  The next encounter was about a year later involving a friend who knew a guy who invented a lawn mower that ran on water.
\par   Sceptical but excited, I said I wanted to meet the man and she came back a few days later quite upset to find he'd recently
\par  opened his front door to a shot gun blast in the face, the dead inventor had been solidly drinking for the past six months since
\par  he came home with a million or so dollars and word to the family that he didn't want to discuss his engines again. O.K. - that
\par             one seemed weird, maybe he was some dodgy businessman or something. I still needed more. 
\par 
\par  More came in the form of an article in the Melbourne Age (13/7/93 p.5) introducing the "ozone safe induction" system, a little
\par  black box that was added to your engine that cut fuel usage by up to two-thirds with a corresponding reduction in pollution. 
\par 
\par     Oz Smart Technologies was the name of the firm, and Mike Holland the inventor that I talked to about his supposed
\par  breakthrough. "Yeah, the U.S. military just flew out some Generals and stuff and they want to buy it, and Nissan just offered
\par  me five million dollars but I want to develop it in Australia." Yeah but, does it work? Apparantly it did, the E.P.A. told him off
\par  the record it was the best design of it's kind they'd ever seen, along with a bunch of techies from Swinburne University who'd
\par    done all the testing, but the media continued to consider the device a bit of a hoax and the company simply does not exist
\par                                anymore - yep they just dissapeared (again). 
\par 
\par  My research today tells me that Mike Holland's invention was probably of the "Improved fuel efficiency" variety simply burning
\par  fuel in a more efficient manner, nothing terribly difficult. Other well known developments are of the "car running on water" kind,
\par     usually involving electrical current running through the water to extract and then burn the hydrogen. Some of the more
\par   interesting involve the use of magnets, sometimes tuned to exact frequencies that take energy from the ambient atmosphere. 
\par 
\par   Since meeting Mike Holland I have mnanaged to collect quite a list of energy inventions that have somehow avoided being
\par    utilised in the market place. You may not beleive they all work, but it would be very difficult to claim that all of them are
\par                           fabrications, still the evidence is here - you decide yourself. 
\par 
\par                                          HYDROGEN POWER 
\par 
\par   Yull Brown - from Sydney Australia developed a method of extracting hydrogen from water in 1978 and utilising it as a car
\par  fuel and fuel for welders. After much publicity (see The Bulletin (Aust) Aug 22, 1989) he had managed to raise over 2 million
\par                              dollars but has failed to fully develop his invention. 
\par 
\par   Francisco Pacheco - an inventor from Bolivia created the "Pacheco Bi-Polar Autoelectric Hydrogen Generator" (US PAT
\par      #5,089,107) which separates hydrogen from seawater. He has built successful prototypes that have fueled a car, a
\par   motorcycle, a lawn mower, a torch, a boat, and most recently in 1990 he energised an entire home in West Milford. After
\par  many conferences (including U.N.) and public exhibitions proving the inventions worth, the wider community is still unable to
\par                                         utilise this technology. 
\par 
\par  Edward Estevel - from Spain developed a classic 'water to auto engine' system in the late 1960's extracting the hydrogen out
\par    of water to use as fuel. This system was highly heralded, then sank among other such 'high hope' hydrogen systems amid
\par                                         rumours of foul play. 
\par 
\par  Sam Leach - of Los Angeles developed a revolutionary hydrogen extraction process during the mid seventies. The unit easily
\par  extracted free hydrogen from water and was small enough to fit under the hood of automobiles. In 1976 two independent labs
\par  in LA tested this generator with perfect results. Mr M.J. Mirkin who began the Budget car rental system purchased the rights
\par             to the device from the inventor who was said to be very concerned about his personal security. 
\par 
\par   Rodger Billings - of Provo, Utah headed a group of inventors that developed a system converting ordinary cars to run on
\par   Hydrogen. Instead of using heavy hydrogen tanks, he used metal alloys called Hydrides, to store vast amounts of hydrogen.
\par   When hot exhaust gases passed through these Hydride containers it released the gas to burn in the standard engines. Billings
\par              estimated the conversion would cost around US$500 and greatly improve fuel consumption. 
\par 
\par   Archie Blue - an inventor from Christchurch, New Zealand developed a car that runs purely on water by the extraction of
\par       hydrogen. An alleged offer of 500 million dollars from "Arab interests" was not enough to convince him to sell but
\par                     never-the-less he has been unable to take his engine to the market place. 
\par 
\par                                         ELECTRIC ENGINES 
\par 
\par  Wayne Henthron - from Los Angeles built an "Electromatic Auto" in 1976 that managed to regenerate its own electricity. In
\par   normal stop and go driving it gave several hundred miles of service between recharges. The system worked by the wiring of
\par the batteries to act as capacitors once the car was moving along with four standard auto alternators acting to keep the batteries
\par  charged. With little official interest in his system the inventor resolved to make the car available to the public to do so, is now
\par   involved with the World Federation of Science and Engineering - 15532 Computer Lane, Huntington Beach, CA, 92649. 
\par 
\par  Joseph R. Zubris - developed in 1969 an electric car circuit design (US PAT #3,809,978) that he estimated cost him $100 a
\par  year to operate. Using an old ten horse electric truck motor, he worked out a unique system to get peak performance from his
\par   old 1961 Mercury engine that he ran from this power plant. The device actually cut energy drain on electric car starting by
\par  75%, and by weakening excitation after getting started, produced a 100% mileage gain over conventional electric motors. The
\par    inventor was shocked to find the lack of reaction from larger business interests, and so in the early seventies began selling
\par  licenses to interested smaller concerns for $500. Last known address was Zubris Electrical Company, 1320 Dorchester Ave,
\par                                         Boston, Ma, 02122. 
\par 
\par Richard Diggs - developed at an inventors workshop (I.W. international) his "Liquid Electricity Engine" that he believed could
\par  power a large truck for 25,000 miles from a single portable unit of his electrical fuel. Liquid electricity violated a number of the
\par    well known physical laws that the inventor pointed out. The inventor was also aware of the profound impact the invention
\par                        could have upon the world's economy - if it could be developed. 
\par 
\par   B. Von Platen - a 65 year old Swedish inventor made a major breakthrough in the field of Thermo-electric engines with his
\par  "Hot and Cold Engine" - based on the fact that wires of different metals produce electricity if they are joined and heated, the
\par    inventors secret breakthrough is said to give more than 30% more efficiency than regular motors, and with a radioactive
\par  isotope for power (hmmm?!) it could be completely free from fossil fuels. Volvo of Sweden bought the rights to this in 1975. 
\par 
\par                                           STEAM ENGINES 
\par 
\par    Oliver Yunick - developed a super efficient steam engine in 1970 (pop.Sci.Dec.1970) able to compete admirably with
\par                                         combustion engines. 
\par 
\par  DuPont Laboratories - built one of the most advanced steam engines in late 1971 using a recyclable fluid of the freon family.
\par             It is assumed to contain no need for an external condensor, valves, or tubes. (Pop.Sci.Jan1972) 
\par 
\par   William Bolon - from Rialto, California, developed an unusual steam engine design in 1971, that was said to get up to 50
\par      miles to the gallon. The engine used only 17 moving parts and weighed less than 50 pounds and eliminated the usual
\par  transmission and drive train in an automatic. After much publicity, the inventors factory was fire bombed with damages totaling
\par  $600,000 . Letters to the Whitehouse were ignored so the inventor finally gave up and let Indonesian interests have the design.
\par 
\par                                             AIR POWER 
\par 
\par   Roy J. Meyers - from LA built an air powered car in 1931. (air has been used for years to power localised underground
\par mine engines) Myers, an engineer, built a 114lb, 6 cylinder radial air engine that produced over 180 HP. Newspaper articles at
\par                  the time reported that the vehicle could cruise several hundred miles at low speeds. 
\par 
\par  Vittorio Sorgato - of Milan, Italy also created a very impressive air powered vehicle in the 70's using compressed air stored
\par          as a liquid. After a great deal of initial interest from Italian sources his invention is now all but forgotten. 
\par 
\par    Robert Alexander - from Montebello, Ca. spent 45 days and around $500 to put together a car (US PAT #3913004)
\par   based on a small 7/8ths 12 v-motor that provided the initial power. Once going , a hydraulic and air system took over and
\par  recharged the small electric energy drain. The inventor and his partner were determined that the auto industry would not bury
\par                                  their "super power" system. To no avail. 
\par 
\par Joseph P Troyan - designed an air powered flywheel that could propel an automobile for 2c a mile. Using a principle of "ratio
\par  amplification of motion" in a closed system, the Troyan motor (US PAT # 040011) was easily attached to electric generators
\par                                 for pollution-free variable power systems. 
\par 
\par  David McClintock - created his free energy device known as the "McClintock Air Motor" (US PAT #2,982,26100) which
\par  is a cross between a diesel engine with three cylinders with a compression ratio of 27 to 1, and a rotary engine with solar and
\par              plenary gears. It burns no fuel, but becomes self-running by driving it's own air compressor. 
\par 
\par                                         MAGNETIC ENERGY 
\par 
\par    John W. Keeley - developed a car in the 1920's using principles similar to Nikola Tesla's, drawing harmonic magnetic
\par  energies from the planet itself. The electric car ran from high frequency electricity that was received when he simply broadcast
\par  the re-radiated atmospheric energy from a unit on his house roof. GM and the other Detroit oil "powers" offered the inventor
\par   35 million dollars which was turned down when they would not guarantee to market the engine. Henry Ford - later bought
\par                                  and successfully shelved the invention. 
\par 
\par  Harold Adams - of Lake Isabella, California, worked out a motor thought to be similar to Keeley's. It was demonstrated for
\par         many persons, including Naval scientists around the late 1940's before it to "disappeared" from our history. 
\par 
\par   Dr Keith E. Kenyon - of Van Nuys, California discovered a discrepancy in long accepted laws relating to electric motor
\par  magnets, and so built a radically different motor that could theoretically run a car on a very small amount of electrical current.
\par  When demonstrated to physicists and engineers in 1976 those present admitted that it worked remarkably well but because it
\par                        was beyond the 'accepted' laws of physics they chose to ignore it. 
\par 
\par  Bob Teal - of Madison, Florida was a retired electronics engineer when he invented his Magna-Pulsion Engine which ran by
\par  means of six tiny electromagnets and a secret timing device. Requiring no fuel, the engine emitted no gases. It was so simple in
\par   design it required very little maintanence and a small motorcycle battery was enough power to get it started. The engine has
\par                                  been met with little else but skepticism. 
\par 
\par  Lester J. Hendershot - built his Hendershot Generator in the late 1920's largely through trial and error. He wove together a
\par  number of flat coils of wire and placed stainless steel rings, sticks of carbon and permanent magnets in various positions as an
\par       experiment. To his surprise it actually produced current. The generator raised considerable attention at the time. 
\par 
\par   Howard Johnson - developed a motor thats power is generated purely by magnetism. It took six years of legal hassles to
\par  patent his design (US PAT #4,151,431) - more information is available from the "Permanent Magnet Research Institute" P.O.
\par                    Box 199, Blacksburg, Virginia 24063. He is currently offering licensing rights. 
\par 
\par   Edwin V. Gray - developed in the early seventies an engine that uses no fuel and produces no waste, The engine that runs
\par                                      itself is U.S. Pat #3,890,548. 
\par 
\par                                       PETROLEUM ADDITIVES 
\par 
\par  Guido Franch - from Michigan U.S.A. began demonstrating in the mid seventies his "water-to-gas miracle" a fuel he created
\par   by adding to water a small quantity of "conversion powder" which was easily processed from coal. He claimed it could be
\par processed for a few cents per gallon if mass produced. The fuel was tested by Chemists at Havoline Chemical of Michigan and
\par  the local University, and both concluded it worked more efficiently than gasoline. Franch continued to put on demonstrations
\par  for years but said the auto manufacturers, Government, and private companies just weren't interested in his revolutionary fuel. 
\par 
\par  Dr Alfred R. Globus - working for United International Research developed a Hydro-fuel mixture around the mid-seventies.
\par  The fuel was a mixture of 45% gasoline, 50% or more of water, and small percentages of United's "Hydrelate" which acted as
\par  a bonding agent. It was estimated that a hundred million gallons of fuel could be saved per day if this fuel were utilised but alas
\par                                       nobody seemed interested. 
\par 
\par  John Andrews - a Portuguese chemist who in 1974 developed a fuel additive that enabled ordinary gasoline to be mixed with
\par  water reducing fuel costs down to 2c a gallon. After successfully demonstrating the substance, impressed Navy officials when
\par                  going to negotiate for the formula found the inventor missing and his lab ransacked. 
\par 
\par  Water and Alcohol Motor - Jean Chambrin, an engineer in Paris ran his private cars on a mixture of denatured alcohol and
\par water. The inventor / mechanical engineer claimed his motor design could be mass produced at a fraction of the cost of present
\par      engines. He received nothing but publicity that led him to take great precautions in regard to his personnel security. 
\par 
\par  Mavrin D. Martin - from the University of Arizona developed in 1977 a "fuel reformer" catalytic reactor that was estimated
\par  to double mileage. The device was designed to cut exhaust emissions by mixing water with Hydro-carbon fuels to produce an
\par                             efficient Hydrogen, Methane, Carbon-Monoxide fuel. 
\par 
\par                                    IMPROVING FUEL EFFICIECNY 
\par 
\par  Edward La Force - from Vermont U.S.A. designed with his brother Robert, a highly efficient engine that burnt all the usually
\par   wasted heavier gasoline molecules. The 'Los Angeles Examiner' (Dec. 29, 1974) reported that the cams, timing and so on
\par   were altered on stock Detroit engines. These modifications not only eliminated most of the pollution from the motor but by
\par    completely burning all the fuel, the mileage was usually doubled. After much publicity the US EPA examined the cars and
\par found the motor designs were not good enough. Few people believed the EPA including a number of Senators who brought up
\par                   the matter in a Congressional hearing in March 1975. The result was still silence. 
\par 
\par Eric Cottell - was one of the pioneers of ultrasonic fuel systems. This involved using sonic transducers to 'vibrate' existing fuels
\par   down to much smaller particles, making it burn up to 20% more efficiently. Cottell then went on to discover that super fine
\par  S-ionised water could be mixed perfectly with up to 70% oil or gas in these systems, this was followed by much publicity (e.g.
\par                           Newsweek, June 17,1974) and then, once again - silence. 
\par 
\par    L. Mills. Beam - had his super-mileage carburetor bought out in the 1920's. In the late 60's he worked out a catalytic
\par  vegetable compound that produced the same super mileage results. In principle it was nothing more than a method of using the
\par  hot exhaust gases of an engine to vapourise the liquid gas being burned. By rearranging the molecules of gas and diesel, he was
\par  able to triple mileage rates, while obtaining better combustion, mileage and emission control. He was refused and rejected by
\par  U.S. State and Federal Air Pollution and Environmental Pollution agencies and was finally forced to sell his formula abroad in
\par                                    the mid-seventies just to survive. 
\par 
\par  John W. Gulley - of Gratz Kentucky managed 115 mpg from his 8 cylinder Buick using a similar vapourising method as that
\par                employed by L.M. Beam. "Detroit interests" bought and suppressed the device in 1950. 
\par 
\par  SHELL research of London - produced a 'Vapipe' unit in the early seventies that also vapourised the petroleum at around
\par  40 degrees centigrade, and used a sophisticated pressure loss reduction system, but alas was not marketed because it did not
\par                                    meet Federal emission standards. 
\par 
\par   Russell Bourke - designed an engine in 1932 with only two moving parts. He connected two pistons to a refined "Scotch
\par  Yoke" crankshaft and came up with an engine that was superior in most respects to any competitive engine. His design burned
\par   any cheap carbon based fuel and delivered great mileage and performance. Article after article was published acclaiming his
\par  engine but once again, to no avail. "The Bourke Engine Documentary" is the revealing book the inventor assembled just before
\par                                             his death. 
\par 
\par                                             NEW FUELS. 
\par 
\par   Clayton J. Querles - from Lucerne Valley, California took a 10,000 mile trip across the country in his 1949 Buick on $10
\par   worth of carbide by building a simple carbide generator which worked on the order of a miners lamp. He claimed that half a
\par  pound of acetylene pressure was sufficient to keep his car running, but because acetylene was dangerous, he put a safety valve
\par     on his generator and ran the outlet gas through water to ensure there would be no 'blow back'. The inventor also toyed
\par                    successfully with methods of fuel vapourisation. (see Sun-Telegram 11/2/74.) 
\par 
\par   Joseph Papp - built the highly regarded Papp engine in the 60's that could run on a 15 cents an hour secret combination of
\par   expandable gases. Instead of burning fuel, this engine used electricity to expand the gas in hermetically sealed cylinders. The
\par   first prototype was a simple ninety horsepower Volvo engine with upper end modifications. Attaching the Volvo pistons to
\par    pistons fitting the sealed cylinders, the engine worked perfectly with an output of three hundred horsepower. The inventor
\par     claimed it would cost about twenty five dollars to charge each cylinder every sixty thousand miles. The idea has gotten
\par                                             nowhere 
\par 
\par                               amid accusations of suppression by the media. 
\par 
\par                                            CARBURETORS 
\par 
\par  G.A. Moore. - one of the most productive inventors of carburetors, he held some 17,000 patents of which 250 were related
\par     to the automobile and it's carburetion. Industry today relies on his air brakes and fuel injection systems, it continues to
\par  completely ignore his systems for reducing pollution, gaining more mileage and improving overall engine efficiency. More info
\par     from "The Works of George Arlington Moore" published by the Madison Company. (See US PAT #'s 1,633,791 to
\par                                2,123,485 for 17 interesting developments.) 
\par 
\par  Joseph Bascle - created the Bascle carburetor in the mid 50's. The carburetor raised mileage by 25% and reduced pollution
\par  by 45%. It's inventor, a well known Baton Rouge researcher remodified every carburetor in the local Yellow Cab fleet, shortly
\par                                         after his arrival there. 
\par 
\par   Kendig Carburetors - were originally hand made for racing cars by a small group of mechanics in Los Angeles in the early
\par    seventies under the title of Variable Venture Carburetors. Eventually a young college student bought one of their less
\par   sophisticated prototypes for his old Mercury "gas hog", when he entered it in a Californian air pollution run - he won easily -
\par   not only did the carburetor reduce pollution, it gave almost twice the mileage. Within a week the student was told to remove
\par the carburetor as it was not approved by the Air Resources Board. The simpler Kendig model was due for production in 1975
\par                                      but has yet to be produced. 
\par 
\par      C.N. Pogue - from Winnipeg, Canada, developed a carburetor (US PAT# 2,026,789) in the late 1930's that used
\par     superheated steam in it's system and managed at least 200 miles per gallon. Much local interest, including threats from
\par             professional thieves, was not enough publicity to see this invention through to the market place. 
\par 
\par   John R. Fish - developed his "Fish" carburetor in the early 1940's that was tested by Ford who admitted that the invention
\par     was a third more efficient than theirs. The design can also be easily switched to alcohol. Nevertheless the inventor was
\par  hindered from manufacture and distribution in almost every possible way, he once even resorted to selling by mail order, only
\par   to be stopped by the Post Office. The device can be currently bought from "Fuel systems of America" Box 9333, Tarcoma,
\par          Washington 98401 - U.S.ph:(206) 922-2228. (US PAT's 2,214,273 and 2,236,595 and 2,775,818.) 
\par 
\par    The Dresserator - was created around the early 70's in Santa Ana, California by Lester Berriman. It was based on a
\par  super-accurate mixture control using greatly enhanced airflow, and could run a car on up to a 22-to-1 fuel mixture. Test cars
\par   passed the pollution control standards with ease and managed up to an 18% mileage gain. Although Holley Carburetor and
\par              Ford signed agreements to manufacture the design in 1974, nothing has been heard of since. 
\par 
\par  Mark J. Meierbachtol - from San Bernardino, California patented a carburetor ( U.S. Patent # 3,432,281 March, 11, 69)
\par                           that managed significantly greater mileage than was usual. 
\par 
\par Much of this list is borrowed heavily from the book SUPPRESSED INVENTIONS AND OTHER DISCOVERIES by Brian
\par   O'Leary, Christopher Bird, Jeane Manning, and Barry Lynes, Auckland Institute of Technology Press, Private bag 92006,
\par                 Auckland, New Zealand. ISBN No 0-9583334-7-5. Along with references noted. 
\par 
\par                              Please distribute this article as widely as possible. 
\par }
 